key-terms.md, before:

# Key Terms of Self-Management

**Basic Terms**

[Circle](#circle)
- [Circle Lead](#circle-lead)
- [Facilitator](#facilitator)
- [Secretary](#secretary)

[Role](#role)
- [Purpose](#purpose)
- [Accountability](#accountability)

[Condition](#condition)

[Tactical Meeting](#tactical-meeting)

[Project](#project)

[Action](#action)

[Request](#request)

**Advanced Terms**

[The Four Pathways](#the-four-pathways)

[Domain](#domain)

[Policy](#policy)

[Strategy](#strategy)

# Definitions

## Basic Terms

### Role


#### Purpose

The Purpose of a role describes the reason that the role exists and is usually aspirational in nature.  The purpose should help someone know how to express the role, even absent any other information, but it should not be prescriptive.  A good purpose can be written as a statement about the world that, if true, the role would have nothing to do.  For example, the purpose of Accountant might be "All of the books are in perfect order."  If that were true, we woudn't need an accountant.

#### Accountability

An ongoing expectation of a Role.  Accountabilities are written with a "gerund" verb, which mean action words have -ing on them.  For example, "Send invoice" is not a well-written accountability, but "Sending invoices" is.  Accountabilties should describe the ongoing action to perform, not how to perform it.  The more prescriptive an accountability is, the less freedom the person filling the role has to express it, which limits creativity, agility, and adpatability.

See "Advanced Terms" for Domain and Policy.

### Circle

*aka Team*

A Circle is a group of roles that share a common Purpose.  Every Circle is also a Role, so has all of the attributes of a Role (Purpose, Accountabilities, Domains, Policies).  Unlike a Role, a Circle has other Roles in it and can also have a Policy.  Circles also have some special roles (Core Roles) which help the circle function.  They are:

#### Circle Lead

The Circle Lead is a special role that represents the needs of the circle to the broader circle that contains it.  It can be thought of as a department head or manager, but it is also very different.  The Circle Lead of a given circle is assigned by the Circle Lead of the broader (parent) circle. A Circle Lead is accountable for:
- Adding and removing people from roles
- Breaking down the work of the circle by requesting projects from roles in the circle
- Setting the priorities of the circle and answering questions about prioritization
- Setting the strategy of the circle (if any)
- Updating the definiton of the circle and its roles, sometimes called the governance records, or updating governance

In Holacracy version 4, the Circle Lead is called the Lead Link.  You may hear this term used interchangably with Circle Head.  Version 5 of the Holacracy Constititon changed this to Circle Lead, so Circle Lead is the preferred term for it.

#### Facilitator

The Facilitator of a circle is responsible for maintaining order in the circle during meetings.  The facilitator runs the Tactical Meeting process and has the authority to allow people to speak or prevent them from speaking.  They also have the authority to choose the order of topics (agenda items) that they think will best serve the circle, or stop a topic prematurely.  They can also choose to throw out topics that do not serve circle.  The Facilitator can also let other people facilitate during the meeting to help others get experience.  In the event there is no facilitator in a meeting, anyone can facilitate.  The Facilitator is generally elected by the circle memebers, not assigned by the circle lead like other roles.

A good facilitator acts like a referee.  This means maintaining neutral energy and following the rules impartially and consistently.  When facilitating, don't try to "take care of people" or make everyone happy.  If someone speaks out of turn, stop them at the first intake of breath, not once they finish their sentence.  Don't be afraid to inturupt people.  Rememebr, "The facilitator takes care of the process and the process takes care of the people."

#### Secretary

The Secretary of a circle is responsible for scheduling the meetings of the circle, helping the meeting along by looking up answers to questions about roles and accountabilties, and recording outputs that are captured during tactical meetings, such as Projects and Actions.  They also have the authority to inturpret the governance of the circle outside of meetings, which is useful for resolving disputes when governance is vague or contradictory.  They can also "strike invalid governance" meaning they can update the governance records without the permission of the circle lead if the governance isn't valid (such as when a Policy compels action), but this is less common.  The Secretary should schedule meetings at times that they think are best for the circle, even if the Circle Lead isn't available for the meeting.  The Facilitator is generally elected by the circle memebers, not assigned by the circle lead like other roles.

Note: Holacracy also has a "Rep Link" (Representative Link) core role, which is omitted here.  Organiztions operating accoridng to Holacracy have a rep link, which is accountable for representing the concerns of roles in a circle to the broader circle, and serves to balance the power of the Circle Lead.

### Condition

*aka Agreement*

A Condition is a requirement for participation or action.  A Role may have conditions for who can fill it.  The organization may also have conditions for who can work in the organization.  These conditions are also called "Working Agreements" or just "Agreements.".  You can request conditions of anyone at time, and if the condition isn't met, you can decide how you want to react.  This is the same thing we do in everyday life.

### Tactical Meeting

A tactical meeting is a special meeting that is designed to surface information, help people get clarity, and remove roadblocks to doing work.

### Project

A Project is a description of a piece of work that has a concrete outcome.  A Project is usually assigned to a Role AND a Person, but can be assigned to a Person without a Role.  This is called an "Out of Role" project.  A good project has a name that is stated in the past tense, such as "All invoices for March sent", as opposed to "Send march invoices."  This helps anyone reading the name of the project, including the person who owns the project, get clear about when the project is done.  A Project is composed of Actions.

### Action

An action is simply the next concrete thing to do on a given project.  If the thing being done has more than one step, then it is a Project, not an Action. Actions can exist on their own, and like projects, can be assigned to a role and a person.  The term "Next Action" describes the next concrete step toward the outcome of a given project.  The size of action often depends on the person taking it, for example, for a project like "Sink repaired", the next action could be "Call Repair Man" or "Get phone book" depending on the person.

### Request

*aka Project Request*

When one role wants another role to do something, they do so by making a project request.  During a Tactical Meeting, you may hear facilitator ask, "Do you want to request a project?"  When accepting a project, you must decide if the project fits one of your roles.  If it does, you must accept it regardless of resources like available time and money.  You have the authority to decide the priority and next action, so accepting a project does not necessarily mean that you will do anything about it beyond consider it.  There's a bit more nuance to this, but for basic purposes this is a good way to think about requests for projects.

In Holacacy, "Out of Role" is called "Individual Initiative" or "Individual Action."

### The Four Pathways

When processing a Topic (Agenda Item) in a Tactical Meeting, you will be asked to use the four pathways to work towrd resolving your concern (Tension).  The four pathways are: Share Information, Request Information, Request a Project or Action, and Set a new expectation.  To get your concern resolved, you can use as many of the pathways as many times as you want in any order.  See Tactical Meeting.


## Advanced Terms

### Domain

"Property" of a role.  A domain is something that the organization controls, that has been delegated to a particular role.  Domains are created to prevent other people in the organization from affecting or impacting the role, usually to prevent something bad from happening.  For example, "Bank Account" would be a good domain to have somewhere in the organization.  This prevents anyone from messing with the bank account without explicit permission of the role.  "Website" is another common domain, which is created when someone updates the website in a way that creates a problem for the person responsible for the website.  Healthy organizations have some domains, but not many.  Don't create a domain unless you have a real concern and you really beleive that the organization will be harmed if someone affects the domain without permission.

### Policy

A Policy describes the conditions for impacting a domain.  A policy can't compel behaviour on its own, it can only cause someone to act a certain way in the course of doing something else that the organization cares about.  For example, a good policy might be "Anyone updating the web site must follow the style guide published by the Website role."  Policies can only govern roles, not people.  If you want to change how a person is acting, you need a Condition (also called an Agreement).

### Strategy

The Strategy is a statement or statements for a circle that helps people in the circle make decisions.  The Circle Lead sets the strategy of the circle.  Many circles start without a strategy and only add it when they become more developed.  A good strategy is written as a comparison between two things, when both things are valuable.  For example, "Maximizing the happiness of the customers we serve even over serving more customers".  Another word for a stategy is a herusitic.

Commit message:

Add Holacracy and TealDog to key terms.

key-terms.md, after:

# Key Terms of Self-Management

**Basic Terms**

[Circle](#circle)
- [Circle Lead](#circle-lead)
- [Facilitator](#facilitator)
- [Secretary](#secretary)

[Role](#role)
- [Purpose](#purpose)
- [Accountability](#accountability)

[Condition](#condition)

[Tactical Meeting](#tactical-meeting)

[Project](#project)

[Action](#action)

[Request](#request)

[TealDog](#tealdog)

[Holacracy](#holacracy)

[Purpose To Action Framework](#purpose-to-action-framework)

**Advanced Terms**

[The Four Pathways](#the-four-pathways)

[Domain](#domain)

[Policy](#policy)

[Strategy](#strategy)

# Definitions

## Basic Terms

### Role


#### Purpose

The Purpose of a role describes the reason that the role exists and is usually aspirational in nature.  The purpose should help someone know how to express the role, even absent any other information, but it should not be prescriptive.  A good purpose can be written as a statement about the world that, if true, the role would have nothing to do.  For example, the purpose of Accountant might be "All of the books are in perfect order."  If that were true, we woudn't need an accountant.

#### Accountability

An ongoing expectation of a Role.  Accountabilities are written with a "gerund" verb, which mean action words have -ing on them.  For example, "Send invoice" is not a well-written accountability, but "Sending invoices" is.  Accountabilties should describe the ongoing action to perform, not how to perform it.  The more prescriptive an accountability is, the less freedom the person filling the role has to express it, which limits creativity, agility, and adpatability.

See "Advanced Terms" for Domain and Policy.

### Circle

*aka Team*

A Circle is a group of roles that share a common Purpose.  Every Circle is also a Role, so has all of the attributes of a Role (Purpose, Accountabilities, Domains, Policies).  Unlike a Role, a Circle has other Roles in it and can also have a Policy.  Circles also have some special roles (Core Roles) which help the circle function.  They are:

#### Circle Lead

The Circle Lead is a special role that represents the needs of the circle to the broader circle that contains it.  It can be thought of as a department head or manager, but it is also very different.  The Circle Lead of a given circle is assigned by the Circle Lead of the broader (parent) circle. A Circle Lead is accountable for:
- Adding and removing people from roles
- Breaking down the work of the circle by requesting projects from roles in the circle
- Setting the priorities of the circle and answering questions about prioritization
- Setting the strategy of the circle (if any)
- Updating the definiton of the circle and its roles, sometimes called the governance records, or updating governance

In Holacracy version 4, the Circle Lead is called the Lead Link.  You may hear this term used interchangably with Circle Head.  Version 5 of the Holacracy Constititon changed this to Circle Lead, so Circle Lead is the preferred term for it.

#### Facilitator

The Facilitator of a circle is responsible for maintaining order in the circle during meetings.  The facilitator runs the Tactical Meeting process and has the authority to allow people to speak or prevent them from speaking.  They also have the authority to choose the order of topics (agenda items) that they think will best serve the circle, or stop a topic prematurely.  They can also choose to throw out topics that do not serve circle.  The Facilitator can also let other people facilitate during the meeting to help others get experience.  In the event there is no facilitator in a meeting, anyone can facilitate.  The Facilitator is generally elected by the circle memebers, not assigned by the circle lead like other roles.

A good facilitator acts like a referee.  This means maintaining neutral energy and following the rules impartially and consistently.  When facilitating, don't try to "take care of people" or make everyone happy.  If someone speaks out of turn, stop them at the first intake of breath, not once they finish their sentence.  Don't be afraid to inturupt people.  Rememebr, "The facilitator takes care of the process and the process takes care of the people."

#### Secretary

The Secretary of a circle is responsible for scheduling the meetings of the circle, helping the meeting along by looking up answers to questions about roles and accountabilties, and recording outputs that are captured during tactical meetings, such as Projects and Actions.  They also have the authority to inturpret the governance of the circle outside of meetings, which is useful for resolving disputes when governance is vague or contradictory.  They can also "strike invalid governance" meaning they can update the governance records without the permission of the circle lead if the governance isn't valid (such as when a Policy compels action), but this is less common.  The Secretary should schedule meetings at times that they think are best for the circle, even if the Circle Lead isn't available for the meeting.  The Facilitator is generally elected by the circle memebers, not assigned by the circle lead like other roles.

Note: Holacracy also has a "Rep Link" (Representative Link) core role, which is omitted here.  Organiztions operating accoridng to Holacracy have a rep link, which is accountable for representing the concerns of roles in a circle to the broader circle, and serves to balance the power of the Circle Lead.

### Condition

*aka Agreement*

A Condition is a requirement for participation or action.  A Role may have conditions for who can fill it.  The organization may also have conditions for who can work in the organization.  These conditions are also called "Working Agreements" or just "Agreements.".  You can request conditions of anyone at time, and if the condition isn't met, you can decide how you want to react.  This is the same thing we do in everyday life.

### Tactical Meeting

A tactical meeting is a special meeting that is designed to surface information, help people get clarity, and remove roadblocks to doing work.

### Project

A Project is a description of a piece of work that has a concrete outcome.  A Project is usually assigned to a Role AND a Person, but can be assigned to a Person without a Role.  This is called an "Out of Role" project.  A good project has a name that is stated in the past tense, such as "All invoices for March sent", as opposed to "Send march invoices."  This helps anyone reading the name of the project, including the person who owns the project, get clear about when the project is done.  A Project is composed of Actions.

### Action

An action is simply the next concrete thing to do on a given project.  If the thing being done has more than one step, then it is a Project, not an Action. Actions can exist on their own, and like projects, can be assigned to a role and a person.  The term "Next Action" describes the next concrete step toward the outcome of a given project.  The size of action often depends on the person taking it, for example, for a project like "Sink repaired", the next action could be "Call Repair Man" or "Get phone book" depending on the person.

### Request

*aka Project Request*

When one role wants another role to do something, they do so by making a project request.  During a Tactical Meeting, you may hear facilitator ask, "Do you want to request a project?"  When accepting a project, you must decide if the project fits one of your roles.  If it does, you must accept it regardless of resources like available time and money.  You have the authority to decide the priority and next action, so accepting a project does not necessarily mean that you will do anything about it beyond consider it.  There's a bit more nuance to this, but for basic purposes this is a good way to think about requests for projects.

In Holacacy, "Out of Role" is called "Individual Initiative" or "Individual Action."

### The Four Pathways

When processing a Topic (Agenda Item) in a Tactical Meeting, you will be asked to use the four pathways to work towrd resolving your concern (Tension).  The four pathways are: Share Information, Request Information, Request a Project or Action, and Set a new expectation.  To get your concern resolved, you can use as many of the pathways as many times as you want in any order.  See Tactical Meeting.

### TealDog ###

TealDog is a software-as-a-service tool which supports self-management practice.  It is mainly used to store "structural" information about an organization, such as circles, roles, role assignments, as well as operational information like projects.  It also has an extensive Tactical Meeting interface which can be used to facilitate tactical meetings.  While TealDog has some support for projects, it is not intended to be a replacment for Project Management tools like Asana or OmniFocus.  TealDog is developed by (Jonathan Yankovich)[https://github.com/tensiondriven] and (Topher Hunt)[https://github.com/topherhunt] at the (Effective Institute)[http://effective.institute].

### Holacracy ###

Holacracy is a business management framework designed for self-organizing teams which defines an organization in terms of Roles instead of People.  Holacacy practice is divided into two main areas of Operations and Governance.  Operations, also known as Tactical, deals with getting the work done in the organization.  Governance deals with teh structure of the organization, and helps clarify which roles are responsible for which aspects of the business.  Holacracy defines a Goverance Meeting Process which uses Integrated Decision Making to allow a group to change the structure of the organization without the need for a centralized decision maker.

### Purpose To Action Framework ###

*Working name; aka Clarity Framework*

Purpose To Action Framework (Clarity Framework) is a fork (modified version) of Holacracy with simplified language and processes focused on being easy to learn and use.  It is comprised mainly of rules from Holacracy for organizational productivity and GTD (Getting Things Done) methodology for personal productivity.  Unlike Holacracy, which uses Governance Meetings to update the organization's circles and roles, the authority to change circles and roles is given to the Circle Lead of a given circle.  Purpose To Action Framework allows organizations to experiment with "Teal" principles like Wholeness, Evolution, and bring your whole self to work - without the large commitment and time and energy investment needed to adopt a more complete solution like Holacracy.

## Advanced Terms

### Domain

"Property" of a role.  A domain is something that the organization controls, that has been delegated to a particular role.  Domains are created to prevent other people in the organization from affecting or impacting the role, usually to prevent something bad from happening.  For example, "Bank Account" would be a good domain to have somewhere in the organization.  This prevents anyone from messing with the bank account without explicit permission of the role.  "Website" is another common domain, which is created when someone updates the website in a way that creates a problem for the person responsible for the website.  Healthy organizations have some domains, but not many.  Don't create a domain unless you have a real concern and you really beleive that the organization will be harmed if someone affects the domain without permission.

### Policy

A Policy describes the conditions for impacting a domain.  A policy can't compel behaviour on its own, it can only cause someone to act a certain way in the course of doing something else that the organization cares about.  For example, a good policy might be "Anyone updating the web site must follow the style guide published by the Website role."  Policies can only govern roles, not people.  If you want to change how a person is acting, you need a Condition (also called an Agreement).

### Strategy

The Strategy is a statement or statements for a circle that helps people in the circle make decisions.  The Circle Lead sets the strategy of the circle.  Many circles start without a strategy and only add it when they become more developed.  A good strategy is written as a comparison between two things, when both things are valuable.  For example, "Maximizing the happiness of the customers we serve even over serving more customers".  Another word for a stategy is a herusitic.
